# Changelog

All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.

The format is based on [Keep a Changelog](https://keepachangelog.com/en/1.0.0/),
and this project adheres to [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html)
as well as the [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org) 
specification.

## Unreleased

### Added

Only relevant for CI:

* `dependabot.yml` that daily checks github-actions and pip.

### Changed

* Bumped lowest required Python version from `3.6.0` to `3.6.2` due to Black
  requirements.

Only relevant for development:

* Updated dev dependencies via `pyproject.toml`

## [5.7.1] 2021-01-12

### Changed

- Ran `poetry update`.
- Updated all development dependencies to newest (non-conflicting) versions.

### Fixed

- Updated `prometheus-client` dependency version constraint `^0.8.0` that only
    allows versions in the range `[0.8.0, 0.9.0[`. This is not correct and leads
    to conflicts when you want to install the newest prometheus client library
    version and this package. Switched to explicit contraints to ensure this
    does not happen again.

## [5.7.0] 2020-12-13

## Added

- Passthrough of Kwargs to FastAPI route that exposes metrics.

### Changed

All changes are minor and non-breaking and mostly effect development only.

- Most of the stuff that is not directly related to the code has been replaced
    with common files / scripts from another repository of mine I use as a kind
    of template for Python projects you can find [here](https://github.com/trallnag/trallnags-hello-python).
- Replaced Makefile with simple Bash script that contains a bunch of functions.
    Easier to maintain and to use.
- Replace workflow files with new workflows.
- Add `conftest.py` that provides utilities for testing.
- Reliscenced from MIT to Apache-2.0.
- Added `DEVELOPMENT.md`.
- Introduced MyPy for linting during development.
- Updated docs.

## [5.6.0] 2020-12-03

### Added

* Parameter `tags` to method `expose()`. Passthrough to FastAPI to support
    tagging. Raised by @chisaipete [here](https://github.com/trallnag/prometheus-fastapi-instrumentator/issues/17).

## [5.5.1] 2020-11-13

### Fixed

* "Duplicate mime type charset=utf-8 on Response Header" raised by @flobaader in
    [this issue](https://github.com/trallnag/prometheus-fastapi-instrumentator/issues/16).
    Fixed in commit <af1c8bd717c9d8cc1192b78124caeb03dd6b7df5> by changing the
    way the content type header is set. Seems like when Starlette's `media_type`
    parameter is used to provide content type, the charset is appended
    again automatically even if it already is part of `Content-Type`.

### Changed

* Run `poetry update` and with that updated a few dependencies.

## [5.5.0] 2020-11-01

### Added

* New metrics closure `requests`. Idea raised by @jpslopes
    [here](https://github.com/trallnag/prometheus-fastapi-instrumentator/issues/15).

### Changed

* Small improvements to docstrings / docs.
* Run `poetry update`.

## [5.4.1] 2020-10-22

### Fixed

* Regression introduced in 5.4.1 by pinning FastAPI dependency to
    `fastapi = "0.38.1, <=1.0.0"` instead of `fastapi = ">=0.38.1, <=1.0.0"`.
    Thanks to @PaulFlanaganGenscape for rasing this issue
    [here](https://github.com/trallnag/prometheus-fastapi-instrumentator/issues/14).

## [5.4.0] 2020-10-20

### Added

* New metric that monitors the number of requests in progress. Can be
    configured to have the labels `handler` and `method`. It can be activated
    with `should_instrument_requests_inprogress` and configured with
    `inprogress_name` and `inprogress_labels`. Check the autogenerated docs for
    more info. Implementation not as nice as all the others because the metric
    requires to be incremented before actually getting the response. This kind
    of conflicts with the approach of this project. See
    e62576e3640be0b677334537d27bc267ab0e91cf for the implementation commit.

### Changed

* Updated a few of the development dependencies to newer versions.
* Updated CI to test with Python 3.9 instead of 3.8.
* Replace deprecated way of creating GitHub environment variables in workflows.
* Update few minor things around the GitHub workflow files.

## [5.3.1] 2020-09-25

### Fixed

* Fix for <https://github.com/trallnag/prometheus-fastapi-instrumentator/issues/9>.
    The `expose` method in the instrumentator ignores the `endpoint` argument 
    and always creates the endpoint with the path `/metrics`. 
    Variable was missing. Raised by @funkybase on 2020-09-24.

### Changed

* Poetry update

## [5.3.0] 2020-09-09

### Added

* Parameter `should_gzip` to `expose` method will check for `gzip` in the 
    `Accepted-Encoding` header and gzip the metrics data. You can expect a 
    reduction of around 90 % in bytes.

### Changed

* Poetry update

## [5.2.3] [5.2.2] 2020-09-03

### Changed

* Improvements to the README and updated dev dependencies.
* Work in GitHub Release workflow.

## [5.2.1] 2020-08-27

### Fixed

* Fix for <https://github.com/trallnag/prometheus-fastapi-instrumentator/issues/7>.
    If a run time error is raised inside the endpoint, FastAPI will not wrap 
    the error in a response object. In addition this instrumentator assumed 
    that `info.response` will always contain the `headers` attribute which is 
    not the case if a runtime error is thrown. Now the metrics check if the 
    response is `None` and that the `headers` attribute actually exists. Tests 
    have been added as well.

### Changed

* Metrics `response_size` and `combined_size` no longer skip if content length 
    is not found. Now the content length will default no zero bytes.

## [5.2.0] 2020-08-22

### Added

* Parameter `should_only_respect_2xx_for_highr` to `default` metrics. Allows 
    you to only put successful requests into the high resolution bucket.

## [5.1.0] 2020-08-19

### Added

* Parameters to set namespace and subsystem to all available metrics.

## [5.0.0] 2020-08-18

### Changed

* Rename instrumentation `full` to `default`.
* Add labels `handler`, `status`, `method` to `http_requests_total` in `default`.
* Rename `http_in_bytes_total` to `http_request_size_bytes`.
* Add label `handler` to `http_request_size_bytes`.
* Rename `http_out_bytes_total` to `http_response_size_bytes`.
* Add label `handler` to `http_response_size_bytes`.
* Rename `http_highr_request_duration_seconds` to 
    `http_request_duration_highr_seconds`.
* Rename `http_lowr_request_duration_seconds` to `http_request_duration_seconds`.
* Remove labels `method` and `status` from `http_request_duration_seconds`.
* Turn `http_request_size_bytes` and `http_response_size_bytes` 
    into summaries.

## [4.0.0] 2020-08-16

* Refactored available metrics. Made them more modular while improving 
    code structure.
* Switched the default fast track metric to a more advanced one.
* Added proper documentation.

## [3.0.0] 2020-08-15

A lot of breaking changes in this release. Prometheus FastAPI Instrumentator 
is now more modular than before and there are multiple different metrics 
one can choose from out of the box or add custom metrics that will be 
automatically applied to the FastAPI.

### Changed

* If you just use the default instrumentator without setting any parameters, 
    nothing changes. The defaults stay the same.
* If you use any of the paramters that were available in the Instrumentator 
    constructor you have to check if they are still available or not. Some of 
    them have been moved to the corresponding `metric` closure / function. I 
    recommend to go through the updated documentation.
* Endpoint `/metrics` is not excluded by default anymore.
* Updated `README.md`.

## [2.0.1] 2020-08-14

### Changed

* Fixed wrong var name in `README.md`.

## [2.0.0] 2020-08-14

### Added

* Option to exclude optional `/metrics` endpoint from schema.

### Changed

* Renamed `should_respect_env_var_existence` to `should_respect_env_var`.
* If `should_respect_env_var` is `True`, the respective env var must be `true` 
    and not just any random value.
* Renamed default env var if `should_respect_env_var` from `PROMETHEUS` to 
    `ENABLE_METRICS`.

## [1.3.0] 2020-08-12

### Added

* Option `should_respect_env_var_existence`. 
    * This makes it possible to only instrument and expose your FastAPI if a 
        given environment variable is set. 
    * Usecase: A base FastAPI app that is used by multiple distinct apps. The 
        apps only have to set the variable to be instrumented.
    * Deactivated by default and the default env var is `PROMETHEUS`.

## [1.2.0] 2020-08-06

### Added

* The observed latency values can now be rounded to a certain number of 
    decimals as an opt-in feature. This can improve bytes per sample required 
    in storage solutions like VictoriaMetrics.

## [1.1.1] 2020-07-19

* Nothing

## [1.1.0] 2020-07-16

### Changed

* Renamed project from *Prometheus FastAPI Exporter* to 
    *Prometheus FastAPI Instrumentator*. Reasoning behind this change: Focus of 
    this project is the instrumentation, not exposition of metrics.

## [1.0.2] 2020-07-15

### Changed

* Updated README.md

## [1.0.1] 2020-07-15

### Changed

* Updated README.md

## [1.0.0] 2020-07-15

### Added

* Explicit method to expose metrics by adding endpoint to an FastAPI app.
* This changelog document.

### Changed

* Switch to SemVer versioning.
* Split instrumentation and exposition into two parts. Why? There exist many 
    ways to expose metrics. Now this package enables the instrumentation of 
    FastAPI without enforcing a certain method of exposition. It is still 
    possible with the new method `expose()`.
* Moved pass of FastAPI object from constructor to `instrument()` method.
* Extended testing.

### Removed

* Exposition of metrics endpoint from `ìnstrument()` call.
* Contribution document. No need for it.

## [20.7.8] [YANKED]

## [20.7.7] [YANKED]

## ... [YANKED]

## Unreleased

* Nothing
